Hurry up. Come on.
This way.
Hurry up.
This will do. Now which one
are you gonna have?
- I'll have--
- No, that's mine.
Alley-oop!
How far are the trees, Danny?
Over 200 feet.
I'd say 300.
Long ways to digging.
We'll get Cavendish
to make a survey.
I wish Big X were here.
Willie, you think X got away?
No, he'd have sent us word
somehow if he had.
Gestapo, you think?
Either that or he's dead.
- Group Captain Ramsey?
- Yes?
I am Strachwitz.
Will you accompany me, please?
- I'll look after your gear, sir.
- Right.
Group Commander Ramsey.
Good morning, Group Captain.
I am Captain Posen,
Von Luger's adjutant.
As senior British officer,
you are to be liaison...
between the prisoners
and the colonel.
We wish to make clear to you
certain matters of--
The word is "policy"?
- Yes.
- Thank you.
Group Commander Ramsey.
I am Colonel Von Luger.
Please sit down.
Group Captain Ramsey,
in the past four years...
the Reich has been forced to spend
an enormous amount of time...
energy, manpower and equipment hunting
down escaping prisoner-of-war officers.
At least it's rather nice to know
you're wanted, isn't it?
For us it's not a matter for levity.
There will be no escapes
from this camp.
Colonel Von Luger, it is the sworn duty
of all officers to try to escape.
If they can't, it is their sworn duty
to cause the enemy...
to use an inordinate number
of troops to guard them...
and their sworn duty to harass the enemy
to the best of their ability.
Yes, I know.
The men under your authority
have been most successful.
This man, Ashley-Pitt, for example.
Caught, escaped, recaptured,
escaped, recaptured.
Archibald "Archie" Ives.
Eleven escape attempts.
Even tried to jump out of the truck
coming here.
Dickes, William.
Known to have participated
in digging of 11 escape tunnels.
Flight Lieutenant Willinski,
four escapes.
MacDonald, nine.
Hendley, an American, five.
Haynes, four.
Sedgwick, seven.
The list is almost endless.
One man here has made
17 attempted escapes.
Group Captain,
this is close to insanity.
- Quite.
- And it must stop!
Colonel, do you expect officers
to forget their duty?
It is because we expect the opposite
that we have brought you here.
This is a new camp.
It has been built
to hold you and your men.
It is organized to incorporate all
we have learned of security measures.
And in me, you will not be dealing
with a common jailer...
but with a staff officer
personally selected for the task...
by the Luftwaffe High Command.
We have, in effect, put all
our rotten eggs in one basket...
and we intend to watch
this basket carefully.
Very wise.
You will not be denied
the use of facilities.
Sports, the library...
the recreation hall...
and for gardening,
we will give you tools.
We trust you to use them
for gardening.
Devote your energies
to these things.
Give up your hopeless attempts
to escape...
and, with intelligent cooperation...
we may all sit out the war...
as comfortably as possible.
- What do you do here by the truck?
- I'm stealing tools.
- For stealing tools, cooler.
- I was only kidding.
- You are American.
- Yes, and you're a German.
Of course.
Why do you come to Germany?
Why fight for England,
your enemy?
"Enemy"?
What are you talking about?
In 1812,
they burned your capitol.
- That's propaganda.
- It's in the history books.
- It's pure propaganda.
- I read it.
Now go away from here.
If you steal tools, cooler.
Yeah, no tools.
Hey, Virgil.
Did you see the cooler?
Boy, is it ever a big one.
I think they expect
a lot of business.
Those two guys who were with us
in the old camp in hut 14...
I can't find them.
- You think the goons left them behind?
- I guess.
What were their names?
Jackson and--
- And Dexter.
- Dexter. That's right.
I'm gonna see who else I can find.
I'll see ya later.
Danny, who are they?
Russian prisoners.
They cut down trees.
- They keep them here?
- No, they take them out.
Willie, cigarettes.
Danny and I have a blitz in mind.
Could you put on a show for the goons?
Sure, mate.
What will it be? An all-out go?
- Mad prisoner?
- Choir practice.
- Knuckles, eh?
- Knuckles would be fine.
Give him the coat.
What are you doing
with my coat, mate?
It's mine!
Are you pushing me,
you common Canadian?
It's mine,
you illiterate Aussie--
I'll send you back
to the Commonwealth!
Stop it!
Stop this nonsense!
It's all right, mate.
We're just having
a friendly little argument.
- No more fighting. No more!
- All right.
- Get back in your huts.
- Yes, sir.
You too!
Get away!
Get back in your huts!
Go on!
Hey, Hilts!
Looks like there's
only one other American.
Some guy named Hendley
in the RAF Eagle squadron.
You got something going already?
See the way the goons
got those towers placed?
- Yeah.
- Got a blind spot in the middle.
A blind spot?
Guy could stand at that wire and not
be seen by that tower or that tower.
The one on the end is too far. They'd
never see me, especially at night.
- You're crazy.
- You think so?
Let's find out.
Right now.
Now, the next step's
a little tricky.
- You're not going out there?
- While they're looking I'm not.
I think I'll take a little walk.
March!
- Danny, do you speak Russian?
- A little, but only one sentence.
Let me have it.
- What's it mean?
- I love you.
"Love you."
What bloody good is that?
I don't know.
I wasn't going to use it myself.
Halt!
Out. Out!
Your friend?
And who vouches for you,
Lieutenant Willinski?
Get out, Sedgwick.
Hold it!
- Your name?
- Ives.
Oh, yes.
Archibald Ives. Scot.
The photograph
doesn't do justice.
I'd like to see one of you
under similar circumstances.
I will not take action
against you now.
This is the first day here,
and there has been much stupidity and...
carelessness on both sides.
Hey! Get out!
Don't shoot!
You fool!
You cross the wire of death!
- What wire?
- This wire! The warning wire!
It's absolutely forbidden to cross it!
You know that!
Yeah, but my baseball rolled over there.
How am I gonna get my baseball?
You first ask permission.
- Get my baseball!
- Stop this nonsense! Get over the wire!
- Immediately!
- You, stay there!
Out of the way.
What were you doing over here?
Like I told Max,
I was trying to get my--
- What were you doing by the wire?
- Like I told Max--
I was trying to cut my way through
your wire because I wanna get out.
You speak German?
Wire cutters.
I have had the pleasure of knowing
many British officers in this war...
and I flatter myself that
we understand one another.
You are the first American officer
I've met. Hilts, isn't it?
Captain Hilts, actually.
- Seventeen escape attempts.
- Eighteen, sir.
Tunnel man. Engineer.
Flier.
I suppose what's called
in the American army, a "hotshot pilot."
Unfortunately,
you got shot down anyway.
So we are both grounded
for the duration of the war.
You speak for yourself, Colonel.
You have other plans?
I haven't seen Berlin
from the ground or air.
I plan on doing both
before the war is over.
Are all American officers
so ill-mannered?
About 99%.
Perhaps while you are with us,
you will learn some.
Ten days' isolation, Hilts.
- Captain Hilts.
- Twenty days.
Right.
You'll still be here
when I get out?
Cooler.
- Name?
- Ives.
Flying Officer Ives.
Cooler, twenty days.
- Cooler, Ives.
- Pleasure.
What did you do in the States?
Play baseball?
I was in college.
Say, Ives.
How many escapes have you tried?
Four over, seven under.
- Tunnel man, huh?
- Sure, I'm not.
How tall are you?
Five-feet-four. Why?
Just wondering.
What did you do in college?
Study physical education?
Chemical engineering.
Did a little bike riding, though.
Bicycles?
Motorcycles.
You know, flat tracks, county fairs.
Picked up a buck here and there.
Helped pay my tuition.
I did a wee bit racing myself.
- In Scotland.
- Bikes?
No, horse racing.
Jockey.
Jockey?
Are you there, Hilts?
- I'm here.
- Do you have jockeys in the States?
- Sure.
- They were the days.
Saturday nights in towns
like Mussoboro and Hamilton.
You could pay off the "birds."
You know, "birds."
Girls, man.
You know of them in the States?
Are you there, Hilts?
What?
You know the kind of clay and gravel
we've got here in the compound?
Aye.
How many feet you think you can
get through in, say, eight hours?
I could cut through this stuff here...
like the bit on an end of an auger.
But you know, it's not the digging.
It's the shoring up with wood...
and getting the dirt out.
That's what you have to worry about.
No, it isn't, Ives.
You don't have to worry about that.
How you going to get the dirt out?
What do they call a mole
in Scotland?
A mole.
Aye.
Well, what do you think, Navy?
I must say, it's an interesting
first 20 minutes.
I'd say we made fools of ourselves.
You know what this is?
This is only the first day.
Don't take too much notice.
The goons may not know who he is.
- I'll pass the word.
- I'll tell the old man.
The prisoner Bartlett is discharged
into your custody, Colonel Von Luger.
I suggest this prisoner Bartlett
to be kept...
under the strictest security
confinement permanently.
Make a note
of Herr Kuhn's suggestion.
We have reason to believe
that this prisoner...
is the leader of numerous
criminal escape attempts.
Squadron Leader Bartlett
has been three months in your care...
and the Gestapo has only
"reason to believe"?
If he once more
falls into our hands...
he will not be so lucky.
Air Force officer prisoners...
are the responsibility
of the Luftwaffe, not the S.S.!
Or the Gestapo.
At present, yes.
That is why he's returned,
for the moment...
to your care.
Of course...
if the Luftwaffe
is not up to the task...
the prisoner will find themselves
totally in our charge.
We regretfully are not
so professionally understanding.
Squadron Leader Bartlett.
If you escape again and be caught,
you will be shot.
- Eric.
- Hello, Roger.
- They dumped you in here too.
- Yes. What's this one like?
Well, it's new.
Here.
Let's find you a bed.
Thanks.
Come in.
- Hello, Roger.
- Hello, sir.
I'll put your bag in your room.
Thanks, Eric.
- How are you?
- As well as could be expected.
The fellows wanted to put up a welcome
committee for you, but that's for later.
Yes, I saw Willie and Willinski
with Mac.
Lot of old friends here.
- How long have you been here?
- Arrived today.
New camp, expert guards.
The elite.
You met the commandant?
Yes, I did.
What were the Gestapo
and the S.S. doing with you?
They wanted to find out
who had helped me to the border.
Who else is here?
Have we got Cavendish?
- Nimmo and Sorren?
- Griffith, Haynes.
- Blythe?
- Yes.
Almost the whole X organization.
Almost.
They cleaned out all the other camps
and dumped us in this one.
As Von Luger put it...
"all the rotten eggs
in one basket."
There's madness in their method.
What about Tommy Bristol?
No, but there's an American.
Hendley.
Is he a scrounger?
Blackmailer?
MacDonald says he's the best.
Good.
Last of the tea until the Red Cross
gets through again.
I scrounged this from Sedgwick.
Did the Gestapo
give you a rough time?
Not nearly as rough
as I now intend to give them.
Personal revenge...
must be kept out
of what we have to do here.
Too many lives are at stake.
What my personal feelings are
is of no importance.
You appointed me Big X.
It's my duty to harass,
confound and confuse the enemy...
to the best of my ability.
- That's true.
- That's what I intend to do.
I'm gonna cause such a terrible stink
in this Third Reich of theirs...
that thousands of troops
that could be employed at the front...
will be tied up here
looking after us.
How?
By putting more men
out of this...
perfect camp of theirs
than have ever escaped before.
Not blitzing out two or three
or a dozen...
but 200, 300.
Scatter them all over Germany.
- Do you think that's possible?
- The men are here to do it.
The goons have put every escape artist
in Germany in this camp.
Have you thought of
what it might cost?
I've thought of the humiliation
if we just tamely submit...
knuckle under and crawl.
You don't advocate that,
do you, sir?
I have to point out
one thing to you, Roger.
No matter how unsatisfactory
this camp may be...
the high command have still left us
in the hands of the Luftwaffe...
not the Gestapo and the S.S.
Look, sir, you talk about
the high command and the Luftwaffe...
and then the S.S. and the Gestapo.
To me, they're the same.
We're fighting the bloody lot.
There's only one way
to put it, sir.
They are the common enemies
of everyone who believes in freedom.
If the high command didn't approve of
Hitler, why didn't they throw him out?
I have no argument
with you, Roger.
As senior officer...
I'm merely pointing out
a pertinent fact.
When are you calling
a meeting, X?
Tonight.
Gentlemen,
no doubt you've heard...
the immortal words
of our new commandant.
"Devote your energies
to things other than escape...
and sit out the war
as comfortably as possible.”
That's exactly
what we're going to do.
We're gonna devote our energies
to sports and gardening.
All the cultural pursuits,
as far as they're concerned.
In fact, we're gonna put
the goons to sleep.
Meanwhile, we dig.
Now, even a superficial look
at the compound...
shows us that huts 104 and 105
are closest to the woods.
The first tunnel goes out
from 105 directly east...
under the cooler and the wire.
That's over 300 feet.
- Did you make a survey, Dennis?
- Only a temporary one, sir.
I make it just over 335 feet.
Let me know when you've got
an exact one. Willie.
This time we'll dig straight down
30 feet before we go horizontal.
That'll rule out
sound detection or probing.
All right, Roger,
but did you say the first tunnel?
I did.
There'll be three.
We'll call them Tom, Dick and Harry.
Tom goes out directly east from 104.
Dick goes north from the kitchen,
and Harry goes parallel to Tom from 105.
If the goons find one,
we'll move into the other.
How many men
do you plan to take out?
250.
There'll be no half measures
this time, gentlemen.
There'll be identification papers
and documents for everyone.
Griff, we'll need outfits
for the lot.
- 2507
- Mostly civilian clothes.
Yes, but, uh--
Okay, Roger.
Mac, maps, blankets,
rations, compasses...
for all the walkers
and timetables for every train.
Right, Roger.
Sorry I'm late, Roger.
All right, Collin, sit down.
We're going to tunnel.
Splendid.
Willie, you and Danny
will be tunnel kings.
Danny, you'll be in charge of traps.
We'll work out their location tomorrow.
Sedgwick, manufacturer.
Griff, as I said, tailor.
Nimmo and Haynes, diversions.
Mac will take care of intelligence.
Hendley? We haven't met.
- Scrounger?
- Right.
Dennis, maps and surveys.
Collin, you'll take
your usual job.
Eric, how are you
gonna get rid of this dirt?
The usual places.
Hadn't anticipated three tunnels,
but we'll manage.
Who's gonna handle security
for all this?
You are.
I want a system of stooges covering
this compound from front to back...
checking every goon in and out.
I want a signal system so perfect...
that if a fellow gets near
a hut in which we're working...
we can shut down without a sign.
There's no point
in discussing more now.
I'll meet each of you on the exercise
circuit to pound out the details.
Nothing else, is there, Mac?
I shouldn't think so, Roger.
Oh, hello.
My name's Blythe.
For birds.
- I've done a little hunting myself.
- Not hunting.
Watching.
Bird-watcher?
Yes, that's right.
Watching them and drawing them.
I suppose you have bird-watchers
in the States.
Yes, we have some.
Tea?
I only drank tea once,
in a hospital.
Where's your kit?
This is it. The rest was confiscated
in the last shakedown.
The goons didn't appreciate
some of my more personal items.
Such as.
You're the scrounger.
Yes, that's right.
I'll need a camera.
- What kind?
- A good one.
A 35-millimeter 2.8...
with a focal plane shutter
should do all right.
All right.
And film, of course.
Oh, of course.
Oh, Hendley, I need a pick.
Big heavy one.
- Only one?
- Two would be better.
Afraid this tea's pathetic.
Must have used these wretched leaves
about 20 times.
It's not that I mind so much.
Tea without milk
is so uncivilized.
Yeah. I'll get our wood.
Close up.
Splendid.
Blythe, what are you doing here?
I'm in photographic aerial
reconnaissance interpretation.
Went for a joyride to see for myself.
It's my own silly fault.
The aircraft bought it.
Got shot down.
Terrifying.
No, I mean,
what do you do here?
Here?
I'm the forger.
The forgers are installing themselves
in the recreation hut. Sedgwick?
- I'm in 110.
- Griffith?
I'd like to work in 109, Roger.
109? Right.
I'l work in 107. For now,
Danny and Willie and their team...
will be in 104.
I want to take a chance on the tunnels
and press ahead without shoring up.
We will need timber for the shaft
and the entrance chambers.
Hendley figures
there are 36 empty bunks.
We can tear up 15 and move men between
huts so the goons won't miss them.
The rest will come
from the strips off the wall.
- Is Hendley handling this himself?
- Not yet.
He's working on some steel
for a pick that Danny needs.
What is going on here?
Turn the water off!
Get your hand away!
Stop this nonsense!
Get away here!
Turn the water off!
Somewhere!
In the stove,
we keep fire burning always.
This way the goons
will not feel like moving it.
Good.
Two tiles are chipped.
We need new ones.
There are some in 113's washroom.
Should match perfectly.
It's going to be
a bit tricky, Danny.
Not when you're organized, Mac.
- We're ready.
- Big enough?
It's perfect. Right through
the middle of the foundation.
Good luck to us, Danny.
Why 17?
This is the 17th tunnel
Danny's started.
It's good.
It's very good.
Haynes.
Get out! Get out!
Out. Out here.
You are not in your hut.
- What are you doing here?
- Mopping up.
- And you?
- Shower. I need a wash.
I'm watchin' him.
I'm a lifeguard.
Put on warm clothes.
You might be outside all night.
No. I vote no.
We've put the goons to sleep like
you said, but one thing like this...
and we're up the creek
without a paddle.
Sit down, won't you?
- Hello, sir.
- Hello.
Squadron Leader Bartlett,
Captain Hilts.
- Flight Lieutenant MacDonald.
- Hi.
I understand you two
are contemplating a blitz out.
Where'd you hear that, sir?
MacDonald. It's Mac's job
to know everything that goes on.
We thought, perhaps,
we might talk it over.
Why? It's only a two-man job.
Everybody in the camp...
is supposed to clear
all escape attempts in advance...
with Bartlett.
We don't necessarily
want to interfere.
It's just that...
What sort of blitz
were you contemplating?
We sneak out at night to a blind spot
I found near the wire.
Then we dig straight down
three feet...
take the dirt, spread it on top so it
won't make a pile and then straight out.
Ives is a tunnel man,
so he digs in front...
pushes the dirt behind him,
and I stash it behind me.
Then we burrow through the dirt
like a couple of moles.
By dawn, we're under the wire,
into the woods...
and gone.
When do you intend to try this?
- When do you intend to try it?
- Tonight.
This may not be quite the right time
for this sort of thing.
Look, sir. I've been in the bank
nearly three years now.
Bloody close
to being wire-happy.
It's a blitz out for me
or forget it.
It'll work.
I know it will.
Good luck.
Thank you.
Hilts, how do you breathe?
We got a steel rod with hinges on it.
We shove it up and make air holes
as we go along. Good night, sir.
Why didn't anybody
think of that before?
It's so stupid
it's positively brilliant!
But it'll bring every goon
in the camp down on top of us.
I don't know.
Perhaps we're being too clever.
If we stop all the breakouts...
it may only convince the goons
that we must be tunneling.
I hope it works.
If it doesn't, they will be
in the cooler for a long time.
- Good, eh?
- Danny, it's bloody beautiful.
This is the dirt
from the compound.
This is from the tunnel.
Wherever we put it, they're going
to spot it a mile away.
Maybe we can put it under the huts.
The dirt's dark there.
No, it's the first place
the ferrets would look.
I saw one measuring the height
under a hut yesterday.
Maybe we could dry it up
the same color.
- We'll have 50 tons of it.
- I was just thinking out loud.
If you must think,
for God's sake, think clearly.
Where the devil is Ashley-Pitt?
We can't destroy the dirt.
We can't eat it.
The only thing left to do
is camouflage it.
That's as far
as my thinking takes me.
Didn't they teach you promptness
in the R.N.?
You'll never believe it,
but I think I have the solution.
The problem is somehow to get rid
of this tunnel dirt over the compound.
Well, of course.
Would you mind?
Now...
you fill these bags
with the dirt from the tunnel.
Then, wearing them
inside your trousers...
you wander out
into the compound, where...
you pull these strings
in your pockets.
Out come the pins.
Eric, it's good.
All you have to do is kick it in.
Unless you're a complete fool,
the ferrets will never see a thing.
It's indecently brilliant.
What do you think, Roger?
- We'll try it tomorrow.
- I already have. It works.
Mac, this is what we'll do.
Present from Tom, sir.
Thank you, Nimmo.
- Nice garden you got, sir.
- Yes, carry on.
All right, let's look sharp!
That looks sharp.
Sir.
Please, gentlemen, continue.
This is merely a routine inspection.
- Good morning, Squadron Leader.
- Good morning, sir.
I am sorry the soil here isn't
better suited to your men's purpose.
We'll manage, sir.
I must say I'm surprised at the extent
of this activity, Group Captain.
Pleased, of course,
but surprised.
Surprised, Colonel?
Fliers are gentlemen,
not peasants to dig in the earth.
So I am surprised.
The English have always been
very keen on gardening.
Yes, but flowers.
Is this not so?
You can't eat flowers, Colonel.
Good point.
I have the nasty feeling
he knows exactly what we're doing.
- Maybe he does.
- You don't really think so?
We'll find out soon enough.
- Morning, Bob.
- Sandy.
Here we are.
Now, let's see.
Biscuits, two packets.
Coffee, two tins.
Bovarro, one jar.
Cigarettes, six packets.
Strawberry jam, Sorren's.
Black currant jam, Cavendish.
And marmalade, mine.
Danish butter, Von Luger's.
I liberated it from his mess supplies.
Oh, yes.
And Dutch chocolate, two bars.
That cleans out the gift boot
for the entire organization.
Now, the first thing we need
is a new form of travel permit.
Forgers don't know what it looks like,
and they can't move without it.
- I'll see what I can do.
- And any other...
identity cards, personal papers,
documents you can put your hands on.
Put them to work.
- Right.
- Good luck.
O come, all ye faithful
Joyful and triumphant
O come ye
O come ye to Bethlehem
Come and behold Him
Born the king of angels
O come let us adore Him
Louie, where the hell
is the air pump?
Patience is a virtue.
I know, dear boy, but the diggers
can only work when the trap's open...
and this is holding us up
very badly.
- Is it finished?
- Of course.
- Why isn't it in?
- Working on the air ducts now.
- When will they be finished?
- One or two days.
- Does it work?
- Of course it works.
- Will it give us enough air?
- It's as much as you'll need.
Excellent.
Have it in by tomorrow night.
Got a light?
Thanks.
- That's pretty, isn't it?
- Yes.
I'm sorry.
Would you like one?
I'll smoke it later
when I'm off duty. Thank you.
You probably have a couple
of roommates, huh?
- Beautiful day.
- Yes.
But I think it might rain later.
"Red sky in the morning,
sailor takes warning.
Red sky at night,
sailor's delight.”
There was a red sky last night.
I never heard that before.
I learned it in the Boy Scouts.
You were a Boy Scout?
So was I.
- Really?
- I had 19 merit badges.
I had 20.
I was working on my 20th when
the government abolished scouting...
and sent me into
the Hitler Youth instead.
Hey, Werner, you think you'll
stay in the army after the war?
Oh, no.
I'm not a well man.
- My teeth.
- Your teeth?
I could tell you stories about my teeth
that would make your hair stand on end.
Our dentist here is a butcher.
But don't tell anyone
I said so.
It's a soldier's right to complain.
Maybe in your army, but here...
one little criticism and...
to the Russian front.
Is that so?
Terrible.
That's terrible.
Let's go to my room
where we can talk more comfortably.
I'd better not.
If Strachwitz should see me--
I was just gonna
make some coffee.
Some real coffee.
Coffee, coffee, coffee.
Where is it?
Marmalade?
My grandmother keeps
sending me this stuff.
Chocolate.
Oh, yeah, here.
Take one.
Von Luger's butter!
Yeah. Keep it.
Nein! I must go.
You can keep it.
We're friends.
With you in the cooler, will we still
be friends? I must report this.
I don't understand.
Report what?
That you and I were
chatting in my room?
- I must go.
- It's okay. Keep it.
I'll never be able to eat it.
I've got all I could eat.
I'm sorry.
All right, forget it.
And that, I'm sure you'll remember,
is the voice of the Nellis warbler.
Now let's turn our attention
to this gentleman, the masked shrike...
Lanius nubicas,
the butcher bird.
The shrike impales his foes
on the spikes of thornbushes.
Not a very lovable character.
Let's have a look at the coloring.
Uniform black above
from head to tail.
A black rump, a black crown
with a bold white flash...
and a white line over the eye.
The shrike lives in
lightly-wooded country.
Sit down. You'll find
drawing materials on the table.
The shrike lives in lightly-wooded
country, olive groves and gardens.
Herr Hendley,
have you taken to birds too now?
You should stick around.
You might learn something.
I have better things to do
than draw birds.
The voice is a monotonous succession
of scratchy, complaining notes.
Let's have a good look at this bird.
He's got a good round shape.
Permission to cross the front here.
Here's another one.
Which one's the forgery?
- That one.
- That's right.
They both are.
What's holding us up now
is the new form of this travel permit.
- We have no idea what they look like.
- Here's one.
And a military identity card...
and a--
An aus visa.
Permission to be
on Reich property.
A ticket to Odin and...
what looks like the ferrets' assignments
by day and hour for the next week.
- You get ten out of ten for this.
- Thank you.
- Take good care of that.
- Where did you get this?
It's on loan.
In order to get the right
amount of outfits, Roger...
I suggest that we work
mainly from service uniforms.
Now, I can do double-breasteds,
single-breasteds...
and rather nice lounge suits.
Lapels. I can do a lot
of things with those.
I can have them deep like that...
or high ones like that.
Here's one that
we're working on right now.
What about buttons?
Take a look at those.
Here's one that I finished, Roger.
Here's one that I dyed
with a bottle of blue ink.
Looks rather good.
What's up, Roger?
The goons would have a field day
if they crashed in on this lot.
That's Sorren's department. I've
started working on the other materials.
This blanket...
particularly the striped,
marvelous... coats.
I've got the chaps working on these
all over the compound.
Those battle dresses,
they're a bit too short.
I'll have to get the chaps to make those
into some sort of workingman's outfits.
Blanket ticking.
Now, I've made these into
rather nice little waistcoats.
- Dyed, of course?
- Of course.
Just take a look at this, Roger.
This blanket material...
we scrape this down
until it's really smooth...
and then dye it
with boot polish.
Corduroy scrounged by Hendley.
I wish we had more of this.
Where in God's hame
did you get these from?
- Hendley.
- Where did he get them?
- I asked him that.
- What did he say?
"Don't ask." Let me show you some of
the overcoats I've been working on.
Good morning, Hilts.
If you're here to find out
if I'm going out again, I am.
- When?
- Seventeen days, seventh of July.
- Dark of the moon.
- Correct.
Is Ives going with you?
Yeah, if he wants to.
You know that Ives
is close to cracking?
- Better he goes out in the tunnel?
- Safer.
Right.
Hilts, it's possible for one man to get
out through the wire, even get away...
but there are, in fact...
a considerable number of people
besides yourself...
in this camp
who are trying to escape.
I appreciate that.
Something's coming--
I can feel it--
and it's coming right around
the corner at me, Squadron Leader.
- My name's Roger.
- All right, Roger.
Yours is Virgil, isn't it?
Hilts. Just make it Hilts.
As I was saying, Hilts...
we have maps of Germany;
general maps, that is.
We have all the information that we need
for the escape routes out of Germany...
but what we do not have--
Is a clear idea of what's
500 yards beyond those trees.
Right. We've tried
every goon in the camp. No go.
We must know the exact position
of the local town.
We want to know where we hit
the main roads. They must patrol them.
Where the local
police stations are.
Where they've got military roadblocks,
and most important of all...
we've got to know how to get from here
to the railway station.
No. Absolutely not.
When I get through that wire, I'm not
gonna be making maps for you guys.
I'm gonna be so far away,
you couldn't hear it...
if they were shooting at me
with howitzers.
That's understandable.
Completely.
I mean, I'd like to help, but--
Interesting idea.
How many are you taking out?
Two hundred and fifty.
You're crazy.
You oughta be locked up.
Two hundred and fifty guys just
walking down the road, just like that?
Well, some on the road,
some by train...
some cross country.
They'll have forged papers, clothes,
maps, compasses, rations.
Has it occurred to you that you're
gonna alert every goon in the country?
Anybody that can carry a pitchfork
is gonna be out looking for you.
They're gonna swoop down and scoop you
up so fast, it'd make your head swim.
Well, thanks anyway.
Anything I can do to help
in the tunnel, let me know.
- That's very good of you.
- Anytime.
Wait a minute.
You aren't seriously suggesting
that if I get through the wire...
and case everything out there
and don't get picked up...
to turn myself in
and get thrown back in the cooler...
SO you can get
the information you need?
Yes.
One has to ask some very strange things
in the job I have.
- You'd get a front place in the tunnel.
- I wouldn't do that for my mother.
- I don't blame you.
- Okay then.
- It's completely understandable.
Thanks, Hilts.
Check.
It's all right.
Blythe's a friend.
What's the matter?
My wallet, my papers,
my identity card, gone.
I lost them, everything.
He lost his wallet.
Do you realize what would happen
if Strachwitz found this out?
- The Russian front.
- Dear, dear.
I've looked everyplace.
I must have lost them
while I was in here.
I told you we were friends.
We'll find them.
Thank you, Herr Hendley.
Not now. It might look
a little peculiar...
if you and I were seen probing around
at this time of night.
Look, I'll find them.
I promise you, I'll find them
if I have to tear this room apart.
- Thank you.
- Forget it.
There is one small favor.
A camera.
We want to take some snapshots.
You know, keepsakes.
Thirty-five millimeter
with 2.8 lens and a plane shutter.
Focal plane shutter.
That's a focal plane shutter.
Let me know when you got it.
He's a crazy, mixed-up kid,
that Werner...
but I like him.
Checkmate.
- When will that air pump be ready?
- I'll have it for you tomorrow.
You're badly behind schedule, Sedgwick.
How's it coming, Danny?
No good.
Today, three times.
You all right?
Pull!
You're gonna have to shore up the whole
bloody tunnel, Roger, all 335 feet.
Four times today.
This way we never get through.
We must have more wood.
That's a lot of timber.
Can you get it?
We'll get it.
We've gotta get it.
I'll put Hendley on it,
and the new man we got this morning.
Okay, Willie.
On the first day of Christmas
my true love sent to me
A partridge in a pear tree
On the fourth day of Christmas
my true love sent to me
Four calling birds
three French hens
Two turtle doves
and a partridge in a pear tree
On the fifth day of Christmas
my true love sent to me
Five gold rings
How's it going
with the rafters?
Taking out 24.
Stay with it.
Bloody singing. I've never worked
so hard in all my life. Hi, Hilts.
Say, Cavendish--
Alley-oop!
Never mind.
Here's a present
from our friend Werner.
Splendid. Simply splendid.
This should do very nicely.
Those are Ashley-Pitt's men.
He requested permission to dispose
of some of his dirt in our attic.
Tom has reached just beyond
that pile of wood, sir.
Harry, of course,
isn't as far as that.
How much further to the trees?
We make it 50 feet, sir.
- Dark of the moon is the seventh--
- Eighth and ninth.
A day earlier in August.
Morning.
There he goes again.
Why's he piling up
all the potatoes in the camp?
I've been working on that,
but I can't find out.
Hilts and Hendley lock themselves
in their room every night.
Sometimes Goff's in there with them.
Other nights he's on guard outside.
Mac, we'll close down Dick and Harry,
seal them off.
Put the entire effort into Tom
and press right on into the trees.
Right, Roger.
Wow.
About face!
Forward march!
What is it?
They're celebrating the Revolution.
It's the Fourth of July.
What the devil's this?
Company, halt!
Gentlemen, you're invited for
free drinks at the wash deck.
A little present from the colonials.
- Down the British.
- Quite right.
- And a little drink to Tom.
- And to getting home.
Very well. We accept.
Up the rebels.
- Down the British.
- If you care to follow us.
About face!
Column, left! March!
Company, halt!
Let's line up.
That explains
what happened to the potatoes.
No harm in closing down Tom
for one day, Roger.
I suppose it'll do us all good
to let off a bit of steam.
There's only 14 feet to go.
We can draw out the whole bloody camp.
- That calls for a drink.
- Hear, hear, sir.
Drink it up.
Moonshine. American moonshine.
Moonshine.
- Cheers, Hendley.
- Drink it all.
Keep it moving.
Hello, Eric.
Don't spill any of that.
- There you go.
- Down with the British.
All right, old timer.
Keep it moving.
Don't get any on your clothes.
- Before your morning tea?
- Tonic water.
Keep it moving.
Don't get any on your clothes, sir.
American moonshine.
Don't smoke right after you drink it.
No smoking.
No smoking while you're drinking.
Get good and stoned, my friend.
Keep it going.
Keep it--
No taxation without representation.
Keep it going, boys.
Keep it--
Keep it going.
Enjoy yourselves.
Well, let's drink to Tom.
In the three years,
seven months...
and approximately two weeks
that I've been in the bag...
that's the most extraordinary stuff
I've ever tasted.
It's shattering.
I think it's rather good.
Well, with your permission, sir,
I think I'll "all an kaye."
Call an aye.
You know what that is?
I'll tell you what it isn't.
It isn't Napoleon brandy.
How do you like it, sir?
Well, it's--
To the colonies.
Independence.
How are you managing over there
without us? Getting along all right?
We seem to be getting along
all right, sure-- sir.
Yes, well, it's--
It's good stuff, Hilts.
Thank you, sir.
Danny, here's to--
Goons in 105.
- Who?
- Strachwitz.
We have to ignore it. If we pay any
heed, they'll know the hut's important.
Here's to going home.
Come on, Danny.
They've searched it a hundred times.
Home.
I'm glad we've got you
in the tunnel with us. To Tom.
Never mind. You'll be walking down
Gale Street in a couple of weeks.
To Tom.
You know, I'm just beginning
to realize that myself.
Why shouldn't you, man?
We're nearly at the trees, boy.
We're nearly at the trees, eh?
Oh, my God!
They've found Tom!
It's the tunnel.
Success!
Let me know
the exact information you need.
- I'm going out tonight.
- Right.
Open up Harry.
We dig around the clock.
Cooler.
Right.
I didn't think
they'd catch him so soon.
He wasn't caught.
Hilts, welcome home.
Are you all right, Danny?
All right.
Bring some shovels. I'm all right.
For God's sakes, Smithy,
you've left out a whole bloody eagle.
That's impossible.
Four days' work
up the bloody spout!
I'm sorry, Collin.
It's all right, Smithy.
It's getting late.
You push off to bed. I'll pack up.
All right.
- Good night, Collin.
- Good night, Smithy.
I can't see a bloody thing.
Heil Hitler.
- Your German's very good.
- Thanks, Mac.
I've put in a lot of--
It's the easiest way to trip up
a suspect. Don't fall for that old gag.
- Remember, German always.
- Righto.
One, two, three, four, five.
No, it's me.
How do you like
the old escape suit?
Fine, Collin.
How do you like mine?
It looks splendid.
Where are you going?
You'll get yourself shot.
- What's the matter with you?
- I'm going out through that fence.
Danny, we're getting out through
the tunnel. We're almost clear.
Please, Willie, let me alone.
I can't go
in that tunnel anymore...
so I'm going out
through the wire.
Think. We're getting out,
but not through the wire.
We're getting out through the tunnel.
It's finished.
I go out now.
Danny, you go through that wire
and you'll get killed.
Don't do that.
Since I was a boy...
I hate and feared...
little rooms, closets, caves.
You've dug 17 tunnels.
Because I must get out.
I hide the fear
and I dig.
But tomorrow night in the tunnel
with all those men...
I'm afraid maybe this time
I will lose my head...
and ruin the escape
for everybody.
So I go now.
Danny, I'll see you
through the tunnel.
I'll look after you.
I'll stick with you all the way.
All right.
- Good evening.
- Hello, Roger.
Well, how do you think we look?
- It's as bad as all that?
- Collin, I--
I want first of all to say that without
you, we would not have been ready.
That's all right.
I had lots of help.
Lots of very good help.
What's the matter, Roger?
You can't go.
What do you mean?
- I can't allow it.
- Why?
Because you can't see
your hand in front of your face.
You'll be caught
before you got ten yards.
That's ridiculous.
Ridiculous.
I never heard anything
so absurd in my life.
I can see perfectly.
I can see perfectly!
I can see that pin down there.
Does that satisfy you?
What pin? Where?
Collin, do you see
the foot of the door?
Of course.
Put the pin down there.
All right.
Come on. Sit down.
Sit down.
It was a good try.
I hate these last-minute letdowns,
but I've only just been told.
It's too risky for you.
Don't you think
that's Collin's decision?
- No, I don't.
- Come on, Roger.
We all know the score here.
At least most of us do.
Your idea of this escape
is to start another front...
to foul up the Germans
behind the lines, and that's fine.
But once we get past
that barbed wire...
once we have them looking
all over Germany for us...
that mission is accomplished.
Afterwards,
we have some ideas of our own.
You mean, getting home?
Back to your family and children?
That's right.
Do you really believe
I haven't thought about that too?
I'm sure you have.
I know Collin has.
And, Roger, I have too.
We think we can
make it all the way.
Not Collin. He'd be an appalling hazard
to the whole escape. That's my decision.
You want to talk about hazard?
Let's talk about you.
You're the biggest hazard we have.
The Gestapo has you marked.
No one has said you can't go.
That's true.
And I have thought
about the Gestapo.
But if you're asking me how far
a commanding officer is allowed to go...
or dare go...
or should be permitted
to play God...
I can't answer you.
But I can tell you...
a blind man is an unnecessary hazard
not only to himself but to the plan...
and must therefore
be eliminated from the operation.
Collin's not a blind man
as long as he's with me...
and he's going with me.
It's all right with you?
Oh, yes. Quite.
Very well.
I'll arrange for your escape numbers
to be altered accordingly.
Good night, gentlemen.
Actually...
he's quite right.
He's completely right.
I really shouldn't go at all.
My eyes have been getting
worse and worse lately.
I think they call it
"progressive myopia."
I can see things up here, close to.
I can see to work, but...
you're just a blur.
I know.
Hell, we'll make it in great shape.
Collin, do you have any tea?
- Yes, of course.
- Then let's have some.
Splendid.
Out.
Hi, Hilts.
Hey, Mac.
When?
Tonight. We thought
they'd never let you out.
Me too.
Let's get at it.
- Bartlett's waiting for you.
- I'll be there.
What time?
Only eight minutes now, Danny.
Are you okay?
Cavendish.
Griffith, down there. Goff.
Smith, Foles...
third on the right.
Blythe, Hendley,
third on the left.
There are the lights.
Right on the tick.
Look down the tunnel.
It's lovely.
It's just like Blackpool
at the height of the season.
You ever been to Blackpool, Danny?
I don't know.
It's time.
Bartlett, MacDonald, Ashley-Pitt.
It's all clear, sir.
We're all set, Roger.
Good luck.
They're coming down
the shaft now, Danny...
and then they'll be coming
right up the tunnel.
Willie, I can't wait till it's over.
I must get out.
What's the matter?
Danny, come here!
Danny and I will go later.
We'll take another place.
Tell me what this is,
and tell me quickly!
This tunnel is mine
as much as anybody.
I dug it, I built it,
I was buried many times.
I go when I want.
Let me out.
Take him out, Willie.
Take him out!
Danny, what is it?
What's going on?
It's all right, Sedgwick.
We're going later.
Danny, it's all right.
We can take another place
in the line. It's all right.
All right, Collin.
Down you go.
Now sit down.
Feel the top rung of the ladder
with your right foot. Got it?
Down you go.
Danny cut out, huh?
Willie took him up top.
Hilts, I--
- Remember, keep your head down.
- Right.
All right?
Hold onto yourself.
You're 20-feet short.
What do you mean,
"20-feet short"?
You're 20-feet short of the woods.
The hole is in the open.
The guard is between us
and the lights.
How could that happen?
The survey took--
What difference does it make?
It's happened!
Damn it, Mac!
I'm trying to think!
We could postpone it
till we dig to the trees.
All the documents are dated today.
It's now or never.
One chance. When the guard goes
to the far end of the compound...
you might be able
to move your men out.
I can make it to the woods,
signal when you're clear.
- What about the towers?
- You'll have to take a chance.
They're gonna be watching the compound,
not the woods.
Mac, pass the word.
Send down 30 feet of rope.
Send down 30 feet of rope!
- What do they want that for?
- How should I know? Get the rope.
- How's it going, Tommy?
- Some kind of foul-up, I think, sir.
- Have they moved into the tunnel yet?
- I don't think so, sir.
He's over there.
All right.
You go first, Eric.
I'm staying here
till we get moving.
- See you in Piccadilly.
- Scott's Bar.
Right.
Thank you.
- Good luck.
- Right.
We're moving.
They're moving through the tunnel now.
They're getting out.
Danny, when Warsaw fell...
you escaped and came to England
because you're a flier.
You came because you wanted to fly
with us and fight the Germans.
We can get out now.
We can get back to England.
Danny, if you don't go
through that tunnel...
everything you've done
will have been for nothing!
- Blythe behind, Mac.
- Right.
- In here, Collin.
- Come on.
Sit down.
You're up, Sedgwick.
I'll take over.
Have you got a piano in here?
That's very funny, mate.
- You won't get this thing through.
- I'll cope.
Was that Sedgwick
with his steamer trunk?
- Who else?
- I wish he was home with his kangaroos.
- We're 20-feet short.
- How the hell--
We're 20-feet short. Hilts is on the
other end of that rope, in the woods.
When you feel a few tugs, off you go,
but keep Collin low going across.
Right.
- Good luck, Collin.
- Thanks, Mac.
What's that?
It's an air raid.
Oh, God, no!
The goons will pull the switches.
We'll lose the lights in the tunnel.
Come on. We can get out
when the lights go down.
It's an air raid!
Searchlights are out! Come on!
Get 'em out!
It's gonna cave!
Danny, it's all right.
It's the lights.
Light the fat lamps down there!
There's been an air raid.
They cut the lights.
In the tunnel, it's all right.
Listen to me.
Danny, look.
Come on, fellas. Move!
We can get dozens out
in this darkness!
What the hell's going on?
- You go.
- No, Danny.
I'm all right. Go.
- What is it?
- I brought Danny back.
- Is he stuck?
- No, he's all right.
Well, get him out, fast!
Come on!
Come on. Move!
Go.
Give me your bag.
We're on the rope!
We had better get out of here,
or we won't catch any of the trains.
It's moving. We'll pass
the instructions from man to man.
- Right.
- I'll be right behind you.
Come on. Come on.
Come on.
- Hey!
- Don't shoot!
Don't shoot!
Get out!
They're coming back!
Oh, boy! There's a lot of shooting
going on up there.
You think they've been shooting them
one by one as they came out?
It couldn't be. We would've
heard the shots before.
- Pull!
- Wait for me.
Don't worry.
Out!
Out.
- How many did he say?
- Seventy-six.
Dismissed.
Atten-hut!
Half the guys who missed their trains
are piled up in this station.
Ashley-Pitt, Roger,
MacDonald, Nimmo.
Makes quite a group.
What do we do?
Wait for the train.
Tallyho.
- Are the police on the train?
- Yes, and the Gestapo are with them.
- We're gonna jump.
- All right.
- I'll tell you when.
- I'd prefer you give me a firm push.
- Are you all right?
- Yes, I'm fine.
That was quite exciting.
- It isn't stopping?
- No, we're all right.
Switzerland.
Bartlett.
Where were you going, Cavendish?
I hadn't quite decided.
What information
were you to collect on the way?
None.
What sabotage directions
did you receive?
What have you done
with your papers?
"Papers"?
Forged papers and identity cards.
Don't be so stupid.
What did you do with them?
All I did was to escape
from a prison camp.
You'd do the same if you'd been
locked up for three years.
I wanted to get home.
I don't think you'll ever see
your wife and children again.
You've obviously got the wrong man.
I'm not even married.
You're wearing civilian clothes.
You are a spy.
Spies are being shot.
This is my uniform.
I had to recut it when I lost weight.
I dyed it with boot polish
to cover oil smears...
I picked up
when I was shot down.
And you lost your insignia
over the years?
That's right.
- Now, look--
- That's all, Cavendish.
Hello, boys.
Hello.
- Hello, Haynes.
- Hello, Cavendish.
Wish I could say I was happy
to see you again.
- Just picked up?
- Yes, this morning.
There's a trainer out there
I can fly.
- Any sentries?
- Yeah, it's gonna be a problem.
When I say, "Go,"
crank this clockwise.
When the engine catches, don't move
or you'll get a mouthful of propeller.
Go!
Next stop, Switzerland.
The Alps.
Splendid.
Over this range, then 20 more minutes,
we've got it made.
What is it? Petrol?
I don't know. Fuel pump,
carburetor. We're losing power.
Go that way! I'll follow!
Stop! Don't shoot!
Collin?
I'm sorry I fouled things up.
That's all right.
Thank you for...
getting me...
out.
Hello? Hello?
Resistance. Resistance?
You are English?
I'm Australian.
You can speak English.
I understand.
Bloody good.
I'm a British officer. I've just escaped
from a prisoner-of-war camp in Germany.
I'm trying to make my way
into Spain now.
You understand me?
Can you help me now?
- I know someone who can.
- Bloody good.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Out!
Halt! Halt!
You are English?
Herr Bartlett?
Your German is good...
and I hear also your French.
Your arms up!
Herr Bartlett...
and Herr MacDonald.
We are together again.
You are going to wish you had never
put us to so much trouble.
What's troubling you?
I'm just a little surprised.
I expected either a long stay
or a very short trip.
Yes.
I have to admit,
I'm a little worried.
I hope to God I haven't blotted
70-odd ledgers.
Oh, no.
We're all over 21,
footloose and fancy-free.
We'd never have got as far as we did
without you, Roger.
For what it's worth,
I think you did a damn good job.
I think we all did.
Yes.
All right. You can get out now.
Stretch your legs for five minutes.
It'll take hours
before you reach the camp.
You know, Mac, all this...
the organization, tunneling,
Tom and Harry...
kept me alive.
And even though we--
I've never been happier.
You know, Mac--
Eleven of your men
are being returned today.
Oh? Who?
I do not have that information.
I am directed by high authority
to inform you that--
that 50 of your officers
were shot while escaping.
"Shot"?
Their personal effects
will be returned.
How many were wounded?
Here are the names...
of the dead.
How many of the 50 were wounded?
None.
They-- The high authority...
only directs me
to inform you that--
that 50 men were--
I see.
I am your guide, serior.
Spain?
- Glad to see you're all safe.
- Thank you, sir.
- How many have been brought back, sir?
- You're the first.
- Do you know how many got away, sir?
- Not yet.
What happened to Blythe?
He didn't make it, sir.
Roger was right about that.
Roger didn't make it either.
I just posted the list.
They shot 50.
The Gestapo murdered them.
Fifty? MacDonald?
Ashley-Pitt?
- Yes.
- Danny and Willie?
No, they're not on the list.
- Haynes?
- Yes.
I'm sorry.
Roger's idea was to get back at
the enemy the hardest way he could.
Mess up their works.
From what we've heard here,
I think he did exactly that.
Do you think
it was worth the price?
That depends on
your point of view.
Yes, sir.
He is not to be saluted.
He's no longer in command.
Job just didn't work out, huh?
- You were lucky, Hilts.
- "Lucky"?
It won't be because I didn't--
How many?
Fifty.
It looks, after all, as if you
will see Berlin before I do.
Sir.